# Reflection on Boston Housing Dataset Ethics

My main source was this article titled [racist data destruction?](https://medium.com/@docintangible/racist-data-destruction-113e3eff54a8).

Refer to the first section of [The PyData Stack Lab](https://github.com/willwin4sure/CSC_630_Machine_Learning/blob/main/pyData/PyData_Stack_Lab.ipynb) for a bit more of my mathematical description of what's going on.

On the Boston Housing Dataset: Having a "B" column for "Black proportion of the population" is already potentially racially discriminatory (if used incorrectly, I could imagine a malicious person being able to affect housing prices of black neighborhoods negatively using this data and a model). Nonetheless, this probably not the main issue with the dataset; after all, data is data and, as mentioned in the article, "The potential to point out systemic imbalance between populations, and offer an avenue to investigate potential discriminatory practices which lead to and sustain such imbalance, is also present in this data." 

The main problem is the quadratic non-invertible function applied to the original data, which assumes, for example, that 0.36 and 0.90 black populations behave identically. This is *destroying data*, and could be hiding something. In addition, the quadratic function pushes the model towards concluding that racial self-segregation may be beneficial towards housing prices (since situations where a neighborhood has majority white people is treated similarly to situations where a neighborhood has majority black people, and neighborhoods with a mix are treated differently). 

Even if this is true in the data, it should be included in the model, not the raw data itself. I think the dataset would still be valuable for education purposes, but only for a meta-lesson on datasets, modifying/destroying data, potential consequences of using bad or manipulated data, and how machine learning can interface with important topics like racism. I think if we wanted an actual study about how race affects housing prices, we would definitely need a dataset with the original data of black proportion of population without any non-invertible function applied to it. The Boston Housing Dataset is already deprecated in scikit-learn and will be removed in an upcoming version, and I agree with this decision, in order to prevent people from using the data frivolously. The data is still available from its original source, of course, and the scikit-learn documentation does direct people to it for specific use cases.